---
layout: page
title: About
---

# About {{ site.title }}

The Idaho Waters Digital Library provides access to information resources relating to water issues in key Idaho river basins. The collection presently includes scientific and technical reports, with an emphasis on [Idaho Water Resources Research Institute](http://www.uidaho.edu/research/entities/iwrri) reports and publications. Documents can be browsed by Location, Date, and Subject Term by using the tabs above. The database can also be queried extensively using the Table feature.

This project would not have been possible without the grant support of the United States Geological Survey and the Idaho Water Resources Research Institute, the metadata and digitization work of Warren Bromley-Vogel and Karen Trebitz, and the ground work and continuing efforts of Jodi Haire.

## About the metadata

The full metadata can be downloaded here [IWDL Export]({{ "/export/iwdl-data.csv" | absolute_url }}), or a [geojson export]({{ "/export/iwdl-geodata.json" | absolute_url }}).

"title,creator,date-original,date,description,location,lat-long,subject,collection,series,iwrri-number,resource-identifier,rights-management,publisher,contributors,contributing-institution,format,type,metadata-cataloger,date-digital,reference-url"

# More

The Idaho Waters Digital Library (IWDL) provides open digital access to unique information resources relating to water issues in key Idaho river basins (http://www.lib.uidaho.edu/digital/iwdl/). Phase one of the project, funded in FY2012, enabled University of Idaho Library Digital Initiatives to digitize and make available more than 400 previously inaccessible documents and create an interactive web interface enabling advanced browsing and discovery. To further enhance the value of the IWDL, phase two of the project seeks FY2017 funding to digitize the remaining print-based Idaho Water Resources Research Institute (IWRRI) materials from 1980 to 2012, making another 245 documents related to unique water resource research accessible and discoverable on the web. This will significantly increase the value of the repository as an aggregated resource, bringing vital content to researchers and other users. Supplementing the digitization effort, phase two will carry out infrastructure improvements to the repository database and web platform. The landscape of web access and digital preservation has changed since the IWDL was established. Digital Initiatives will further develop the public web interface incorporating principles of responsive design, accessibility, and search engine optimization that will ensure quality usability and discovery. Better use of metadata and structured markup will increase the findability of resources in the collection, connecting with more researchers. Database maintenance and an archival storage workflow will be developed to ensure long term preservation of digital assets. As with earlier work on this collection, the new phase of IWDL will inform our practice and serve as a model for other projects striving to navigate the changing digital landscape. It will provide access to a wealth of content and technical enhancements that add value for researchers, scholars, and other stakeholders. IWDL will support ongoing research and understanding of our region while preserving an era of previous work and research investment. The enhancements provided by phase two of IWDL development will solidify the value and importance of the collection, while ensuring quality user experience, discoverability, and stewardship for the long term.

Statement of regional or State water problem.

A significant amount of unique research publications related to Idaho water resources remain difficult to discover and access. Many documents currently exist in print copies only, limiting the availability to researchers and the public. To address this issue, the IWDL has been developed and managed at the University of Idaho Library since 2008, when Jodi Haire laid the foundation as a graduate project. Using the CONTENTdm digital asset management system, her work was influential in jump starting the Digital Initiatives program at the library, representing its first large document collection hosted online. The IWDL was greatly enhanced and expanded by funding from the United States Geological Survey administered by IWRRI in FY2012 (Project 2011 ID175B), enabling library staff to build out the collection as it is today. More than 480 documents are currently accessible, ranging in date from 1897 to 2016 and representing over 550 critical subject areas, such as mine wastes, water policy, hydroelectric power, and aquifer management. IWDL serves as a central repository to facilitate research on Idaho watersheds, enabling better discovery, access, and dissemination, while ensuring digital preservation of the materials. The value of this resource was recognized by selection for inclusion in the Western Waters Digital Library, which aggregates “digital collections of significant primary and secondary resources on water in the Western United States” (http://westernwaters.org/). Today the IWDL is an important and well-used collection, averaging over 300 document views per month in 2016. In FY2017 we hope to continue building and enriching the collection with additional content, metadata, and discovery features. One of the original objectives for IWDL is to host a complete run of IWRRI print documents. To meet this goal, we must digitize and process an additional 245 documents, adding up to twenty thousand pages to the database. This will significantly increase the value of the repository as an aggregated resource, bringing vital content to researchers and other users.

As in phase one of the IWDL project, digitization activities will be complimented by development in the public facing web interface and preservation back end. The IWDL web site requires a refresh to keep up with contemporary usage patterns. With more people accessing our collections via diverse devices, it is necessary to rethink the web design, refactoring to a fully responsive template that functions equally well on a smart phone or desktop. This redesign will incorporate the latest web standards to ensure accessibility and maximize search engine optimization. Likewise, the digital preservation landscape has changed significantly since 2011, and we endeavor to follow the most up-to-date best practices to steward our resources. Phase two will carry out database maintenance and preparation to secure all IWDL content in our archival storage. We will enact further measures to safe guard the digital objects and metadata, ensuring continued access for future generations.

Phase two of the IWDL project opens access to regional water resource documents related to key Idaho river basins that are currently difficult to obtain. Improvements to the web infrastructure increases the visibility and value of existing research outputs, while facilitating current research activities. Updating the repository and digital archive safeguards information and research investment. This phase of IWDL development will secure better access, discoverability, and preservation of unique water resource research for scholars and other stakeholders in the region.

The project seeks to increase the value and importance of the IWDL by aggregating the remaining IWRRI materials and improving user experience and discoverability. This will solidify the IWDL as a vital resource for researchers and scholars, supporting ongoing research and understanding of critical challenges in our region. Work on metadata and digital preservation will ensure continued long term access to the unique materials.

The IWDL and two other UI Library digital collections are included in the Western Waters Digital Library (WWDL http://westernwaters.org/). WWDL aggregates unique materials related to water resources in the Western US improving and simplifying discovery for a diverse group of stakeholders. However, it does not build collections or digitize materials. WWDL and other aggregators rely on quality regional collections, such as IWDL, New Mexico Waters (http://econtent.unm.edu/cdm/landingpage/collection/NMWaters), or California Water Documents (http://ccdl.libraries.claremont.edu/cdm/landingpage/collection/cwd), to provide the content necessary for researchers.
