This digitization project provides a fascinating look into the meticulous care our Idaho researchers took in preparing these detailed reports. The documents include data and computer code (often in old FORTRAN programming language), figures, tables, and appendices, to ensure usability and reproducibility and of research. Original hand-drawn cover art is included with the printed reports in some files. In some cases the color photos that are in the folders were re-developed in silver gelatin medium so they would print better in the published reports. Also interesting is tracking gradual evolution from paper forms to the first “born digital” reports in the late 1990s.

The unsung heroes of these documents are the secretaries who prepared the reports for publication. The consistent formatting of the 1980s and early 1990s reports, including in the diction and error-free typesetting, is truly impressive. Figures in the older documents consist of graphs on transparent paper, photo prints, and diagrams, carefully taped into pages that have the figure headings typed or taped onto them. In fact, many of these pages had to be individually scanned on a flatbed scanner, because the layered and taped pages would disintegrate if fed through the automatic scanner. The deteriorating condition of the paper reports reinforces the need to digitize and preserve this important body of scientific work.

This repository provides high-quality work upon which current Idaho water resources research is based. Much of this literature has never been published in journal articles. Rather, the reports put research results directly and immediately into the hands of water management practitioners who depended on IWRRI and collaborations with the region’s agencies and universities to produce high quality research for decision-making support. 

The site is relatively well-visited, receiving approximately 300 views or downloads per month in 2016. Even as we were working, we received requests for reports that were catalogued but not yet in the system. Requesters included private users on their own and through the EPA Region 10 library in Seattle. Unfortunately there are still some documents for which we find citations, but which have not been physically found. In our search for more documents, we reached out to IWDR, Idaho National Laboratory, and some researchers, all of whom were enthusiastically helpful: “Thanks […] for your efforts.  The old IWRRI reports, in particular, are valuable for documenting the work that’s been done” (personal communications). We anticipate that visitation rates will increase with the improved web-design and discoverability.
